From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
77. Recorded live Monday, August 13th, 2007.
Support for Hansel minutes is
provided by Tellerik already controls
the most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms, asp.net
web application. online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers journal
the world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott and Carl, talk about
moving to a hosted email
provider. Hi, this is Carl Franklin
and you're listening to Hansel
minutes from Hanselman it's dot
com. I'm here with Scott
this week. Hi Scott. Hey,
how are you, sir? I'm
fine. You enjoying your, a
hiatus before you jumped ship
over to the motherland? Yeah,
it's definitely weird. I don't
like being idle. Yeah, it's
supposed to be vacation. What
I'm learning, I'm learning. Right?
So this is going to
be an interesting show. Well,
it is because we were
originally going to talk about
debugging and I think we'll
still do one on debugging
next week, but I was,
I sent you an email
and I'd asked you if
you'd received it yet, or
you were searching, we were
searching for an old email.
It was an old email
you wanted me to look
for. Right? I wanted you
to look for an old
email cause of a missing
package that was sent. Right.
And you said you couldn't
do it because you hadn't
been in the office in
a while and that's what
your searchable archive was. Right.
And you said you had
some kind of a plan
with a 16 gig flash
drive. So yeah. So you,
so here's my email system,
right? I, I have a
mail server and it's not
exchange, first of all, I
don't do active directory. That's
not my thing. You know,
so setting up exchange is
probably not an option for
me. And it, you know,
it's just a matter of
pain in the ass factor.
You know, I'm not an,
I'm not an it guy.
I don't have a whole
lot of users. It's just
me and a few people
here. None of them have
accounts on my machines. Everybody's
like internet accounts, it's all
popped three. So I have
all tens M Damon and
their outlook style web client
is okay, but it's not
great. And it has little
bugs. Like when somebody sends
you a invitation to a
meeting, it doesn't take into
account time zones. So it'll
say, you know, 9:00 AM Pacific
time, you know, whatever it
is. And it'll go in
at the wrong time, it'll
go in three hours early
or late, or what are
you doing? Hosted exchange. You
can buy an exchange server
and have it handled for
you entirely Outsourced for 40,
50 bucks a month. Yeah.
It's just something I don't
don't want to deal with.
Right. I want to either
con I'm a control freak,
right? I want things to
run under my own domain.
So Hosted exchange can run
under your own domain. You're
right. That is an option,
but it means giving up
some, a certain amount of
control, which I enjoy. So
I know that if there's
a problem with it, I
can solve it. Is the
control about holding onto your
email, like having it in
your control, like in the
sense of having the bits
or the bytes available to
you, or is it about
your domain Much? That's it?
I like to, I like
to know where my data
is all the time and
I, you know, I just
need to know that I
have access to everything and
I don't, I really dread
the idea of getting on
the phone with somebody at
three in the morning so
that I can get access
to a file or something
like that. I just don't,
you know, that's the kind
of stuff that I don't
want to do. So I
have, I have outlook and
I'm my main machine here
at work. I used to
have my main outlook box,
be my laptop, but it
proved to be too much
of a pain to back
up all the time. So
I have a big raid
system here at work and
my outlook PST file is
on there. Okay. So when
I need to search for
old emails, I need to
be on my machine at
work. Okay. So that's the
story. So I think, I
think you're insane. Yes, I
am insane. Yeah. That's just,
that's ridiculous. So I thought
about getting a 16 gig
flash cards so I could
carry my PSD file around
with me. So then I
could use it on, you
know, my laptop. I could
use it at work. I
could use it at home
or whatever, and backing up
should be a little bit
easier. Huh? Okay. That's just
what I thought. Okay. Until
I spoke to you. Yeah.
So I think that's just
the craziest thing I've ever
heard. And I've heard a
lot of crazy stuff and
I do a lot of
crazy stuff too. I'm a
total control freak, but I
recently moved my whole family
over to Gmail. I considered
windows live for domains. We'll
talk about that too. But
at the end of June,
I moved the entire handsome
and family on three continents
and 11 family members over
to Gmail, which is basically
moving them over to Google
apps. I didn't move them
to the gmail.com domain. I
actually signed up for Google
apps for domains. This is
a service that Google offers,
Right? It's a google.com/a, and
basically you set up your
MX record, right? Your male
trans transfer record for your
DNS, such that Gmail is
in charge of it. Right.
And then you set up
what are called C name
aliases. And that's like basically
pointing a subdomain at, at
Google. Sure. This is all
DNS stuff. Right? Yeah. Very,
very simple stuff that control
panels now may have been
difficult years ago where you'd
have to actually edit a
text file and you know,
have Telnet access. But now
with all of the different
control panels that your ISP
is provide you, it's a
very simple operation. And Google
has even made a, a
real simple wizard that even,
you know, my dad could
go through, whereas it's basically,
what's your ISP, you know,
click here. Here's a screencast
to explain exactly how you
need to log in and
enter these values into these
boxes. And they've got step-by-step
for all the major ISP.
Yeah. So I pointed things
like mail dot, hanselman.com, calender.hanselman.com.
I've even got docs like
documents.hanselman.com. Okay. So my wife
and I can share kind
of word and Excel, like
applications that are all Ajax
based. Okay. And I, I
imported all my outlook email.
I used a program called
G move G move from
a company called limit none.
And I, I paid, I
think 25 bucks or something
for this program. And I
moved two plus gigs of
outlook email over to this
thing, PST file. And you
uploaded it to Google. Well,
it's pretty, it's a pretty
cheesy process right now, but
yes, essentially, I did. What,
what you do is G
move hosts, a intermediate format.
I'm an intermediate place. So
basically G move uses Ole
automation to talk to outlook
uses the outlook automation interfaces
takes all of your email
on a folder by folder
basis or by a date
range. It's up to you.
You can decide if you
want to do it by
folder a folder plus date
range. I think I said
all folders for the last
two years or something like
that. It sends it up
to G move and holds
it in a middle place
and then makes a fake
pop server. And then basically
Google sucks it in via
pop. Oh. And it looks
like the email came exactly
as before. I mean, it
doesn't, it doesn't look like
it's coming from you. It
looks like it came as
it as it. Okay. No
pop three can do that.
I mean, you just get
the originally, right? Yeah. And
G and G move, even
though they're sending it to
themselves, they modify the header
is such that it looks
like it's a fresh import
from pop. Okay. And then
if you pay Google, Google
has two different things. They
have the free version, which
is two gigs per user
and it's free. And then
they have the $50 per
user per year, which gives
you 10 gigs. But it
also gives you I'm app
import support. So if you
have an iMac folder already,
or any email with a,
with a public I'm app
available, all right. Count, it'll
just suck all that over,
Slow down a little bit.
Basically what you're saying is,
Oh, now I have like
a hundred accounts at Franklin's
dot net, your family, friends,
whatever. And I also have
some other domains that I
host here. So you're saying
I could keep all of
those domains, the, the, the,
the same names. No, it's
not going to be Franklin's
net@gmail.com. It's going to be
Franklin's dot net, right? Absolutely
Franklins net. So for example,
I've just logged into the
dashboard for Google maintenance. So
I'm at the hanselman.com Google
dashboard, and it says welcome
Hanselman family. It says all
services are running smoothly. It
actually says this daily active
users, 11 active users in
the last 90 days, I
can click on the 11
users. It has an option
where I can go in
upload and provision all of
my users. It also has
a web service available, such
that I could provision my
users remotely. So I could
write an, I could write
an administration application. Sounds like
it's got full features, but
last I knew Gmail was
an invite only kind of
thing. Is that still true?
No, no. That's you can,
anyone can sign up for
Gmail, but this isn't Gmail.
This is Google apps. Gmail
hasn't been even invite only
for many, Many, many months
really. Okay. Shows what I
know A totally separate universe.
This is Google apps and
you're getting something that looks
at like Gmail behaves like
Gmail, but the domain is
yours. And I guess, you
know, the thing that hits
me all of a sudden
is you, you know, when,
when you want to search
for emails, it's in one
place and it's Google. Right.
Exactly. And one of the
things that's nice about it
is that there's even a
mobile version. So I can
log into my email on
my windows mobile device, and
I get a tiny HTML
version and I can search
all my email from there.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I
can do that too with
my web server. And, you
know, it sounds like a
lot of the same things
that my mail server does.
It just sounds like it
does it better. What do
you mean? How can you
search all of your email?
Yeah. Well, if I kept
all, if I moved all
the email from my PST
file onto my mail server,
like back, okay. I could
do the same thing and
I could just run the
web client via which format
VI map I could do
it with CSV. Right. So
I could, I could export
to CSV. I could upload
an import into, into my
domains and then could have
web access. But, but the
fact is, well, the fact
is is that the client,
the web client is just
not that Good. Yeah. I
mean, I'm really surprised that
you would compare that kind
of crazy hack to something
like a complete provisioning system
for user manual. Well, I,
I take offense at that.
It's not a crazy hack.
It's a, it's a, it's
a mail server system that
has a web interface. It's
a fully it's in physics,
smarter mail. Or do you
know what the name of
the, in fact it does
all of the things that
you've said so far, and
it doesn't pretty well, except
that there's a few killer
features that, that are deal
breakers. Do you know what
the name of the mail
system is? There's a lot
of the different things I
like. Yeah. It's M Damon
from Alton and Damon. M
D a E M O
N. And it's what I've
been using for years and
years and years. But another
reason that I want to
move away from it is
because it's freaking expensive. It
used to be like, you
pay like four 99, you
get the server and then
updates were free. And then
they started doing this, you
know, you got to get
upgrade protection. Well, otherwise you
can't get updates and it's
not. Yeah. They're out. They
have an outlook connector. Do
you use that one? Yeah,
I have used that, but
I don't really need an
outlook connector. What I needed
was to be able to
just move. Yeah. Once, and
then I'm looking at their
site here. And if you
have a hundred users, it's
$720 for their outlook connector.
Yeah. Yeah, exactly. That's pretty
harsh. No, it is it's
and that's exactly what I'm
saying. I want to move
away from this and into
something else, but in certainly,
you know, the alternative is
moving your PSD file around
on your, on a, on
a, on a 16 gig
stick. But you know, that
doesn't help the rest of
my users. Well, one of
the things that I like
about the Google premier edition,
this is the one that
you actually pay for is
that there's a 99.9% uptime
guarantee. Yeah. No, well, I
would exceed that less. Right.
So you get that Google
level of uptime and I've
never had them been down
in the last two months.
So that's not a very
lot of, a lot of
data to calculate, you know,
as far as uptime, but
it's, it's been very nice
because there has not been
a single problem. And being
able to go in and
reset my user's password. I
mean, it seems like these
are small things. I mean,
you can do these, like
you say, with any commercially
available email server. Yeah. But
it's just so clean. It's
just so simple. I can,
like right now I can
see who's used a certain
amount of space in their
quota. I can up their
quotas. I can change their,
you know, it's just, all
these different things are very
clean, very simple. I can
create internal lists and also
we have the Google calendar
so we can share our
calendar now Of the premiere
edition. Right. Does that mean
that everybody on your domain
has to have the PR
has to pay $50 per
year? Yeah, exactly. Okay. So
if you have multiple domains,
what I would do if
you were switching over is
I would decide which domain
is the most important to
you. There's two ways you
can do this. You could
just go free, right? All
you, all you lose with
the free one is you
get two gigs instead of
10. And there's no uptime
guarantee, which means that if
they were down, then they're
down. Right. Okay. And then
you could go bonkers. That
could be totally free, but
it's advertiser supported, right? So
you still have the little
ads on the side. Oh,
I see. So you switch
over to the premier, you
get the 10 gigs, you
get the provisioning tools and
the web service, and you
get to remove the ads,
but then you, you do
have to pay $50 per
user, per year. So for
us, with the family, it
was nice and simple. They
just pay me the 50
bucks. I send it off
to Google and everyone gets
this benefit. We get shared
family, Google chat, we get
shared calendars. So from a
family perspective or an organizational
perspective, it's great. A lot
of universities are doing this.
They've got a set up
now where a university can
basically outsource all their email
to Google, which is nice
for the kids now, because
it looks a lot more
like the stuff that they're
used to be using rather
than like Elm or whatever
the university system is. And
then the university could potentially
use the free version and
not pay anything so they
can save, you know, tens
of thousands of dollars a
year, but you can have
multiple accounts, right? You have
multiple domains, you don't have
to sign all of them
up if you don't want
to. But at the same
time, if some of your
domains are aliases, you could
go into Doug. Right now,
I'm going into domain settings
and I'm going under domain
names. I have my primary
domain and I have three
domain aliases. So users can
share the same mailbox with
the different addresses. So you
could have karl@franklins.net. You could
have Carl at  dot
com. They'd go to the
same place. Okay. Now you
mentioned that windows live.com also
has Similar service, right? so@domains.live.com,
they've got the, the new
windows live custom domains. So
it's a real similar kind
of a service. You get
windows, live mail, which looks
like windows, Hotmail. You can
have an, basically an unlimited
number of accounts. You get
a hundred accounts initially. And
then once you've proven that
you kind of own the,
that you own the, the
product and funnel out, you
have to fill out a
questionnaire. Then you can have
an unlimited number of counts.
So you could have a
hundred, 200, 500 accounts. And
then the accounts that you
get on that particular custom
domain also automatically become windows
spaces. So they can have
a blog and they become
messenger logins. So then they
immediately become something that can
be logged into messenger. So
it's integrated with the whole
kind of live family of
services. Is it free? Yeah,
it is. It is free.
Let me go ahead and
just I'll, I'm gonna click
get started and I'm going
to say, you can click
get started and it says,
purchase a domain or use
a domain you already own,
I can say, purchase a
new domain and they have
a questionnaire where I can
go in and say, I
want to let go to
register.com. And then they'll send
me through this questionnaire and
I could potentially buy a
domain right there on the
spot. I'm going to go
ahead and put in that.
I want to use hanselman.com
and see what the process,
where the process takes me.
So here it says, well,
do you want handsome undock
Scott hanselman.com to be the
administrator. So it's basically saying,
you know, do you have
an existing live ID that
you want to do? Administration
of this particular site? It's
a very, very clean, kind
of a familiar interface. It
looks a lot like, like
Hotmail and like windows live,
like the stuff that we're
kind of used to seeing,
right. I'm going to say,
go ahead and make Scott
the administrator. And then it
pops in and it says
service configuration. It says, well,
I need you to do
this with your DNS. You
can go in and click
on membership accounts and a
sign up. So it looks
like it's free. It looks
like it's free for life.
And I don't see anything
anywhere about quotas about this
space or anything like that.
When it first came out
last Year, it was 250
megs. And I believe that
when windows live mail was
released, it was upgraded to
two gigs. Yeah. I think
I saw something on dig
about Mo this was about
backup, which I think like
both Google and Microsoft are
now sort of battling for
online, offline backup strategies. And
they're offering a whole bunch
of gigabytes for free. I
think that was something different.
Yeah. This is representative of
moving your life into the
cloud. Right? Right. I mean,
think about what we would
have felt five, 10 years
ago to, to put all
of my inbox and all
of my calendar into a,
into a cloud system like
this. Right. But we built
up trust, right? When Hotmail
runs for years without too
many downs and a Gmail
ones for years. I mean,
I think I've, I can
count on one hand how
many times I've hit google.com
and have it been done?
Yeah. I've never, never had
like three or three or
four Times and I hit
refresh and it's back. Right.
You know, little hiccups. So
though that, that trust is
you can't just say, click
a button here, move your
life into the cloud. It
took years of trust for
me, you know, Google did
what I wanted it to
do. I like the, the
Gmail interface. And it was
really easy to move the
whole family over. And I
was able to, to let
the family continue to have
their, their same email addresses.
I went and because they're
my family, I went and
asked them what their passwords
were. And I set their
passwords up to, they were
exactly the same. That was
made a lot of people
more comfortable. Yeah. Now what
about if you don't like
it, can you move it
back, Jack? What, with, with
windows live, you can always
turn around and move it
back. Right. You know, any
change that you make to
something like a DNS can
always be, be turned around
so you can switch back
if you don't, if you
don't like it. Although one
of the things that's nice
about Google domains that I
haven't seen on the windows
live custom domains is that
they'll give you a temporary
email address on Google without
changing your, without changing your
DNS. So for example, you
sign up for Google apps
and not quite sure if
you like it yet. What
you can do is set
a rule on your current
email system that you want
your email temporarily forwarded. Then
they'll give you a funky
email address. Like if I
was going to be Scott
hanselman.com, they'll say like Scott
hyphen enhancement.com and then someGood@gmail.com,
basically a throwaway address that
no one would ever ever
see you set up forwarding
to go to that temporary
place. And then that lets
you see your email in
two places. So it stays
where it is. Your existing
system stays the way it
is. And then you can
also see it in Gmail.
And if you like it,
then switch over and then
you're, then you're set, but
you've never made the DNS
change. So it doesn't matter.
So I found the fact
for windows live custom domains.
If you go to domains.live.com
and click on help, which
is in the upper right
hand corner, there's a FAQ.
And it tells you where
the windows live custom domains.
You can use your own
custom domain name to send,
receive emails and instant messages,
which we've been talking about.
Create up to a hundred
email accounts within your domain.
So if you need more
accounts, you can apply to
receive unlimited number. So I
suppose I don't know what
that application involves. There's a
questionnaire that they ask you
to fill out and then
once you fill out the
questionnaire, you can get unlimited.
Okay. And then receive two
gigabytes of inbox storage space
for each of your accounts
with windows live Hotmail, check
your email from any web
computer controlled junk email with
a Microsoft smart screen technology,
receive email virus, scanning and
cleaning and interact. Yeah, right
there. You just nailed two
things that were huge for
me now, junk email and
virus scanning. This is a
really important thing. My, the,
the folks that were handling
my email previously charged like
10 bucks for virus scanning
and then 10 bucks for
S for spam. Yeah. And
because my email address is
so public spam was becoming
a huge problem for me.
Right. And I was, I
mean, I get, you know,
literally a hundred to one
spam spam to legitimate email,
right? So I actually hired
a company called spam soap,
which is basically a dedicated
to doing nothing but spam
filtering for, for email. And
I was paying them $150
every three months when I
switched over to Google, or
if you switch over to
live domains, you get all
of their spam filters and
all of their virus scanning
and that's all built in.
So for me, I actually
saved money by switching over
to a service that had
much smarter spam. I've had
about six false positives. Once
I set those up in
my white list, I don't
think about spam anymore. And
that has been a huge
benefit. So I think moving
to a big system like
a Microsoft or Google would
be a benefit for anyone
who gets an oppressive amount
of spam. Wow. This is,
this is, this has been
a, definitely a life changing
episode for me, Scott, because
you know, this, this has
been a problem constantly throughout
my it career. A few
more, if you want to
say that, so I'm, I'm
going to do this. I'm
really going to do it.
Yes. You're really induced. So
you need to, you need
to do this. You need
to let's research them. Yeah.
It's not just the money,
it's the hassle and the
accessibility, you know, I'd be
really interested. Let's do some
research offline and let's you
and I sit down and
think about which ones ready
for you. You know what,
if you prefer email, if
you prefer I'm going to
do law, I'm going to
try live because you're doing
Gmail, I'm doing live. That'd
be nice to be able
to compare notes and see
what happens. Let's do that.
And let's, we'll get some
of the, the live custom
domain guys to, to maybe
help walk you through it.
Maybe just move one of
your accounts that doesn't matter,
or do a temporary switch
over. Well, I'm going to
have to do it because
my, my mail server expires
at the, probably in, in
a few weeks. So I'm
going to Thing will be
how hard you ha, how
hard of a time you
have transferring existing stuff. Right.
Cause really for me, it
wasn't useful until I got
at least the last six
months of email up. Yeah,
Yeah. That would be really
interesting. I think that this
is all representative of office
of us moving our lives
into the cloud and not
feeling so bad about it,
right? I mean 99.9 uptime
or, you know, you know,
five nines, even these kinds
of uptimes were just on,
you know, impossible to comprehend,
at least in the PC
world and the web world,
certainly mainframes have this kind
of uptime and a lot.
But what I'm saying is
that we're so used to
our machines crashing. We're so
used to having really lousy
service from the various service
providers, whether it be cable,
I was looking at the
Verizon Fios user agreement. You
know, I signed up recently
with Fios, which is the
fiber optic internet service here
in the U S right.
And it turns out that
in the small print, it
says that there is absolutely
no uptime guarantee. Hmm. I
have no way to get
any money back or any
in anything if they're down,
they're down and there's nothing
I can do about it.
Think about it in terms
of the, the airline industry,
right. They, how many times
you've been kicked off a
plane because the, they overbook
Sure. Google or Microsoft did
these things. If we, if
my Gmail suddenly said, Oh,
you know, sorry, I had
a space, even though they
had promised that I wouldn't
be, that would be pretty,
pretty frustrating. They've gotten to
the point where they can
actually provide these services in
a way that we can
trust them. And I don't
feel bad about using these
guys at Gmail because I'm
still downloading these things into
outlook via pop. Right. So
I have a local archive.
Right. Good. All right, Scott,
that's a shell. This is
a good one. Like I
said, it's a life changing
one for me. I'm going
to bite the bullet and
we'll see you next week
on handsome minutes.